Ruby: add an AST reference guide (#11056)
github/codeql: docs/codeql/codeql-language-guides/abstract-syntax-tree-classes-for-working-with-ruby-programs.rst

.. _abstract-syntax-tree-classes-for-working-with-ruby-programs:

Abstract syntax tree classes for working with Ruby programs
===========================================================

CodeQL has a large selection of classes for representing the abstract syntax tree of Ruby programs.

.. include:: ../reusables/abstract-syntax-tree.rst

> 

Reviewer: Possibly we should introduce this list. Maybe:

```suggestion

The descriptions below use the following conventions and placeholders.

```

* An ``IDENTIFIER`` denotes an arbitrary identifier.
* A ``CNAME`` denotes a class or module name.
* An ``FNAME`` denotes a method name.
* A ``TERM`` is either a semicolon or a newline used to terminate a statement.
* Elements enclosed in ``« »`` are grouped and may be suffixed by ``?``, ``*``, or ``+`` to denote 0 or 1 occurrences, 0 or more occurrences, and 1 or more occurrences respectively.

Statement classes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> This table lists subclasses of Stmt_ representing Ruby statements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This table lists subclasses of Stmt_ that represent Ruby statements.
```

+---------------------------------+--------------+----------------+---------+
| ``;``                           | EmptyStmt_   | Stmt_          |         |
+---------------------------------+--------------+----------------+---------+
| ``END {`` StmtSequence_ ``}``   | EndBlock_    | StmtSequence_  |         |
+---------------------------------+--------------+----------------+---------+
| ``next`` «Expr_»?               | NextStmt_    | ReturningStmt_ |         |
+---------------------------------+--------------+----------------+---------+
| ``redo``                        | RedoStmt_    | Stmt_          |         |
+---------------------------------+--------------+----------------+---------+
| ``retry``                       | RetryStmt_   | Stmt_          |         |
+---------------------------------+--------------+----------------+---------+
| ``return`` «Expr_»?             | ReturnStmt_  | ReturningStmt_ |         |
+---------------------------------+--------------+----------------+---------+
| ``undef`` «FNAME ``,``»+        | UndefStmt_   | Stmt_          |         |
+---------------------------------+--------------+----------------+---------+

Calls
~~~~~

> 

Reviewer: Should there be a brief introduction here?

Author: Yes, I'll add an intro here.

+============================+=====================+================+===============================+
| Expr_ ``[`` Expr_ ``]``    | ElementReference_   | MethodCall_    |                               |
+----------------------------+---------------------+----------------+-------------------------------+
| MethodName_ «Expr_ ``,``»* | MethodCall_         | Call_          |                               |
+----------------------------+---------------------+----------------+-------------------------------+
| LhsExpr_ ``=`` Expr_       | SetterMethodCall_   | MethodCall_    |                               |
+----------------------------+---------------------+----------------+-------------------------------+
| ``super``                  | SuperCall_          | MethodCall_    |                               |
+----------------------------+---------------------+----------------+-------------------------------+
| ``yield`` «Expr_ ``,``»*   | YieldCall_          | Call_          |                               |
+----------------------------+---------------------+----------------+-------------------------------+

> | ``&IDENTIFIER``            | BlockArgument_      | Expr_          | Used as an argument to a call |

Reviewer: In the rest of this article, you've kept the placeholders that you defined at the start in normal text, so we should probably follow the same course here:

```suggestion
| ``&``IDENTIFIER            | BlockArgument_      | Expr_          | Used as an argument to a call |
```

+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------+--------------------------------+---------+
| ``case when`` Expr_ ``then`` StmtSequence_ «``else`` StmtSequence_»? ``end``                                                    | CaseExpr_           | ControlExpr_                   |         |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------+--------------------------------+---------+
| ``case`` Expr_ ``in`` «TERM CaseExpr_»+ ``end`` f                                                                               | CaseExpr_           | ControlExpr_                   |         |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------+--------------------------------+---------+

Unary operations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

All classes in this subsection are subclasses of UnaryOperation_.

> +--------------------+----------------+----------------------------+-------------------+
> | Expression syntax  |  CodeQL class  | Superclasses               | Remarks           |
> +====================+================+============================+===================+
> | ``~`` Expr_        | ComplementExpr_ | UnaryBitwiseOperation_    |                   |
> +--------------------+----------------+----------------------------+-------------------+
> | ``defined?`` Expr_ | DefinedExpr_    | UnaryOperation_           |                   |
> +--------------------+----------------+----------------------------+-------------------+
> | ``**`` Expr_       | HashSplatExpr_  | UnaryOperation_           |                   |
> +--------------------+----------------+----------------------------+-------------------+
> | ``!`` Expr_        | NotExpr_        | UnaryOperation_           |                   |
> +--------------------+----------------+----------------------------+-------------------+
> | ``not`` Expr_      | NotExpr_        | UnaryOperation_           |                   |
> +--------------------+----------------+----------------------------+-------------------+
> | ``*`` Expr_        | SplatExpr_      | UnaryOperation_           |                   |
> +--------------------+----------------+----------------------------+-------------------+
> | ``-`` Expr_        | UnaryMinusExpr_ | UnaryArithmeticOperation_ |                   |
> +--------------------+----------------+----------------------------+-------------------+
> | ``+`` Expr_        | UnaryPlusExpr_  | UnaryArithmeticOperation_ |                   |
> +--------------------+----------------+----------------------------+-------------------+

Reviewer: This table formatting looks as if it's off by one, resulting in a display with columns 2 and 3 merged. I _think_ this will fix it:

```suggestion
+--------------------+-----------------+---------------------------+-------------------+
| Expression syntax  |  CodeQL class  | Superclasses               | Remarks           |
+====================+=================+===========================+===================+
| ``~`` Expr_        | ComplementExpr_ | UnaryBitwiseOperation_    |                   |
+--------------------+-----------------+---------------------------+-------------------+
| ``defined?`` Expr_ | DefinedExpr_    | UnaryOperation_           |                   |
+--------------------+-----------------+---------------------------+-------------------+
| ``**`` Expr_       | HashSplatExpr_  | UnaryOperation_           |                   |
+--------------------+-----------------+---------------------------+-------------------+
| ``!`` Expr_        | NotExpr_        | UnaryOperation_           |                   |
+--------------------+-----------------+---------------------------+-------------------+
| ``not`` Expr_      | NotExpr_        | UnaryOperation_           |                   |
+--------------------+-----------------+---------------------------+-------------------+
| ``*`` Expr_        | SplatExpr_      | UnaryOperation_           |                   |
+--------------------+-----------------+---------------------------+-------------------+
| ``-`` Expr_        | UnaryMinusExpr_ | UnaryArithmeticOperation_ |                   |
+--------------------+-----------------+---------------------------+-------------------+
| ``+`` Expr_        | UnaryPlusExpr_  | UnaryArithmeticOperation_ |                   |
+--------------------+-----------------+---------------------------+-------------------+
```

Author: Thanks for catching this, I kept having trouble with table formatting in this PR.

| IDENTIFIER ``=`` Expr_                                     | OptionalParameter_     | NamedParameter_      |                                                                    |
+------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------+----------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------+
| IDENTIFIER                                                 | SimpleParameter_       | NamedParameter_      |                                                                    |
+------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------+----------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``*`` IDENTIFIER                                           | SplatParameter_        | NamedParameter_      |                                                                    |
+------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------+----------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------+

Pattern classes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> All classes in this subsection are subclasses of CasePattern_. These expressions typically occur in the context of a ``case`` using pattern matching syntax.

Reviewer: Minor suggestion. Does this retain the correct meaning?

```suggestion
All classes in this subsection are subclasses of CasePattern_. These expressions typically occur when a ``case`` uses pattern matching syntax.
```

Author: Yep, this reads correctly to me and seems clearer.

+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------+---------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| StringLiteral_ StringLiteral_                                                        | StringConcatenation_ | Expr_         | Implicit concatenation of consecutive string literals                                  |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------+---------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

Variable classes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

All classes in this subsection are subclasses of VariableAccess_.

+----------------------------+------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------+------------------+
| Example expression syntax  |  CodeQL class                | Superclasses                                  | Remarks          |

> +===========================+==============================+================================================+==================+

Reviewer: Looks as if this line is off by one:

```suggestion
+============================+==============================+===============================================+==================+
```

+============================+=====================+================+===============================+
| Expr_ ``[`` Expr_ ``]``    | ElementReference_   | MethodCall_    |                               |
+----------------------------+---------------------+----------------+-------------------------------+
| MethodName_ «Expr_ ``,``»* | MethodCall_         | Call_          |                               |
+----------------------------+---------------------+----------------+-------------------------------+
| LhsExpr_ ``=`` Expr_       | SetterMethodCall_   | MethodCall_    |                               |
+----------------------------+---------------------+----------------+-------------------------------+
| ``super``                  | SuperCall_          | MethodCall_    |                               |
+----------------------------+---------------------+----------------+-------------------------------+
| ``yield`` «Expr_ ``,``»*   | YieldCall_          | Call_          |                               |
+----------------------------+---------------------+----------------+-------------------------------+

> | ``&``IDENTIFIER            | BlockArgument_      | Expr_          | Used as an argument to a call |

Reviewer 2: Sphinx says: `Inline literal start-string without end-string.` . Perhaps we need a space between `&` and _IDENTIFIER_

See: https://github.com/github/semmle-code/actions/runs/3395113988/jobs/5644570096#step:18:17

Reviewer: You may well be right. I assumed that it would be okay because line 63 appeared to have a double-backtick followed by another symbol without a space.

Author: Hopefully fixed now.

| ``self``                   | SelfVariableReadAccess_      | VariableReadAccess_, SelfVariableAccess_      |                  |
+----------------------------+------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------+------------------+

> Desugaring

Reviewer: Do we expect the target audience for this section to be confident of the meaning of "desugaring"? Would it be better to talk about simplifying and expanding the simplified syntax, or something along those lines?

Reviewer 2: That is a good point. Not every user will be familiar with the terminology.

Author: True - I think we should mention the term "desugaring" as part of the text as we have a `getDesugared` predicate, but probably with a description of what it means. I think that "syntactic sugar" is a commonly understood term, though?
